# odin-rock-paper-scissors

Live Website: https://issac-in.github.io/odin-rock-paper-scissors/

This is a Rock Paper Scissors game with two gamemodes - First to Five, and Best of Five. It's playable on any device, on any viewport - in dark or light theme.

Created using HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. Tested using Cypress.

## Purpose & Reflection

The goal that was achieved here was to significantly expand beyond the scope of the defacto project prompt of a regular rock paper scissors game that was dictated by The Odin Project's 3rd project prompt. To achieve this, these were the things that I did that were beyond the regular scope.

1. Develop a comprehensive test suite using Cypress for Test Driven Development (TDD).
2. Be able to play not one, but two versions of Rock Paper Scissors.
3. Create a responsive, user-friendly design for any viewport.
4. Have the player be able to choose between a dark & light themed web page.
5. Maintain accessibility according to W3C standards.

## Q & A

> Why did you choose this particular project?

From the most abstract sense of choice, I chose to do this because I felt like it was a good project I could handle in my path to acquire skills for front-end development.
I chose to do this project because it was prompt given by the Odin Project Foundation's curriculum that I've been studying through. It's also because it was a chance to further develop more practical skills from the knowledge on HTML, CSS, and JavaScript that I learned so far. While it'd be nice to have used JavaScript frameworks like React, I chose regular JavaScript to establish a good foundation of practical skill & knowledge about vanilla HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.

> What did you hope to learn from this project (and did you accomplish that)?

I hoped to learn how to actually utilize HTML, CSS, and JavaScript altogether to create a really nice website. I definitely accomplished this, plus some. Even though this is the first formal time I've developed a website from scratch using all three, I've professional experience modifying & adding HTML and CSS code for the sake of accessibility, separate professional experience with using Cypress and JavaScript. Even more so, I've worked in UI/UX before during college and majored in Design & Interaction, so it was really nice getting to see alot of the skills I've acquired come together here.

> What challenges did you face? And if you solved them, how?

Man, oh man, this was a really good project for overcoming challenges.

- The first challenge I really faced on the refresh of this project was concisely the project management triangle - where I had to balance the feature scope, and the time I was able to allocate to this, with a deadline set to 2 weeks, before the December holidays came around. With no real prior experience of doing anything precisely like this before, the ability to even ballpark time estimates for this project was unreasonable. Thus, the guiding metric used was personal confidence - how confident was I of being able to effectively use the knowledge from TOP, professional experience, and some Google-fu to complete the given features. Having applied this, after having done blueskying for the features and things I wanted to do for the project, I utilized this guiding metric to establish and select the primary five goals I listed above. 
- Another challenge I faced was the desire to expand the feature scope AFTER having established the five goals. It was a desire I'm sure we're all familiar with, but I knew well the consequences of expanding the feature scope however I like - we all have own graveyards of unfinished projects due to over-ambitious scopes and consequential loss of motivation. To overcome this, I decided to engage in test driven development, where I would first write a comprehensive Cypress Test Suite that tests the primary five goals, and just write any future refresh code to ensure the tests actually pass. As a result, I was able to keep feature creep in check, and accomplish TDD during this project, with strong critical code coverage thanks to the Cypress Test Suite.
- Here's a small list of technical challenges I ran into along the way:
  - **Divitis** - when I was initially drafting up an overhauled HTML + CSS structure, I initially just threw in divs everywhere so that I could just see the visual responsive design, but I knew this was just non-accessible website design and would actually make it harder for myself to quickly read through the HTML structure later on in the development process. To solve this, I utilized the MDN docs to look up & reference suitable semantic tags to substitute as many of the divs as possible. Thus, I avoided 'divitis', and established an accessible HTML structure too!
  - **CSS organization** - when I've worked with CSS in the past, I've seen two primary ways that people have done it - randomly and alphabetically. I think from an organic perspective, I'd figure that the alphabetically people do it randomly first, and then organize it alphabetically once sending it off for a pull request. Either way though, I didn't have much experience writing my own CSS from scratch, so just doing it randomly would invite difficulties to adjusting it and knowing what's responsible for where on the page during developmen. And since I was the only one working on this project, I didn't have to stress about maintaining a universal standard, which is a benefit that alphabetical CSS organization has. Thus, I utilized a categorical CSS organization method - where things were primary-grouped by color palette, general css, headings, header, main, footer, and media queries - and sub-grouped by type of CSS, like positioning, display & box model, color, text, and other. From this, I successfully achieved a consistent method to the madness of CSS styling, and was able to readily read and understand my styles.css file during the process. Not to mention, it was easier for me to remember the CSS properties that relate to each other more this way.
  - **addEventListener** - I was trying to intially pass in a function to an addEventListener for the playButton with parameters that weren't event. This simply just didn't work the way I needed it to, and no level of Google-fu, Stack Overflow, nor code mashing was getting to work, because it simply didn't work that way. Thus, I decide to just initialize in logic.js the gameMode variable as a global variable outside of all of the functions, so that it could be readily accessed from any of them anyways, solving a massive headache in the process.
  - **Avoiding code repetition for gamemode code** - After I fleshed out the pseudo-code and various logic flows I wanted for the latest project refresh on this rock paper scissors game, I realized that I desperately wanted to avoid repetitive code between the two gamemodes I wanted to implement - first to five wins, and best of five rounds. It would be relatively straight forward to have separate methods, but maintaining that code would be fairly nightmarish, and most of the code would be effectively duplicate between the two, since the higher level abstractions of each are very similar in logic flow, except for the result declaration and regular round logic. Thus, I took advantage of using a global variable for gameMode and utilized switch statements to maintain readable code of what's going on, and minimize duplicate functions whenever possible. It was a bit unsatisfactory to have the methods stil have duplicate code lines, but I feel like I've optimized for code readability (the ability to read the code in English effectively) rather than doing the absolute best I could to avoid repetitive code, and still avoiding nesting beyond three levels of indentation as much as I thought reasonable.
  - **responsive design** - As I fleshed out more and more of the HTML, CSS & JavaScript during this latest project refresh, I recognized that even though I had solid design for the desktop, and thought I did for mobile. I realized that in practice, it was not as responsive as I hoped, because the actual viewport available for the web page on mobile is lower than the device's actual dimensions due to the space the browser takes to display the tab and browser theme itself. Thus, I had to adjust my CSS to that, and made several trade-offs.

    1. Less accessible `<h1>` in exchange for more responsive `<h1>` content.
    I recogized that on small mobile devices, that the original long "Rock Paper Scissors!" title wouldn't fit on the viewport width. Thus, I decided to set it up so that depending on if the viewport width was large, medium, or small, that it would display the long `<h1>` title, medium `<h1>` title, or simply not at all, thus relying on my logo to communicate the title symbolically, and still retaining visible availability of the theme button without it looking unaesthetic.
    2. Footer is not locked at the bottom of the page in exchange for a fully visible game loop. I recognized on small mobile devices that the full game loop was not fully visible on load, cutting off the results text and reset button, which would contribute to poor & unintended user experience, because I had a fixed footer that was constantly visible at the bottom of the page with the header. Thus, I sacrificed that original desired CSS effect so that the whole game loop was visible on load without any scrolling required, so that the user doesn't have to go out of their way to fully access any part of the game loop.
    3. Figuring out a way to cleanly switch between dark and light theme. Even though I myself prefer dark theme way more, I know leaving an accessible light theme is also good website design, so I was left with a challenge of how to readjust my CSS to come up with a clean way of changing the colors, without a massive headache. With some Google-fu, I stumbled across the concept of using CSS variables, I'm so thankful that I learned that this was a thing. A sub-challenge that occurred as a consequence of this was figuring out how to get desired hex colors after they've been filtered as a consequence of the filtering being applied for a different part of that HTML component. I wasn't able to just simply change CSS selectors for this either, so I ended up just using Chrome Dev Tools to figure out a close enough color that matched what I originally desired even after the filter was applied to it. The end result is that I have CSS and JS code for switching between the themes cleanly that lets me easily change the colors as I desire with minimal issues. I do think the light mode is a bit hideous, but it is suitable contrast-wise - beauty is in the eye of the beholder, as they say.
    4. Setting up button behavior to work between both desktop & mobile. I set out to have buttons on desktop and mobile that appeared to function similar, but on different conditions - whether it was on hover, or on press, respectively. This was tough, because I originally tried to simply apply the desired CSS properties with a normal grouping method, but that didn't work because it wold apply both the :hover and :active classes to the CSS property for both viewports, which ended up causing undesired behaviors. Thus, I utilized media queries for essentially detecting a touch screen or mouse cursor to distinguish :active for touch screen, and :hover for mouse cursor using screens, establishing the desired original desired behavior of the buttons.

> Were there any challenges you did face, that you did not solve? If so, why not?

Honestly, I feel like the decision to stick to TDD instead of just throwing in more features with more testing mid-way through the development was key to me actually getting to the point of completing the project refresh and having something to show for the time and effort put in, but I feel like the challenge is unsolved, because I really would like to keep working on this project ad nauseam. I think it's really true that personal projects are never really left finished, but rather in a (hopefully) satisfactory state given the constraints handed off. The desire to want to add more and more itself is a challenge, but I think it'll be need to be left off, because I really would like to further establish the skills I've learned sofar, and that requires more repetitions through working on a breadth of projects.

Another challenge I faced that I did not really solve subjectively was the light color palette theme. I feel like if I put in more time, I could achieve a more satisfactory color palette that's still aesthetic and accessibility compliant, but I have not done so due to the time constraints I've set to work with this project, and it effectively being the December holidays already, at the time of writing. I just compromised by ensuring the light theme was accessibility compliant, especially since I personally only use dark mode and dark themed websites whenever available. Light mode's a flashbang, ya know?


## Credits

Credits to 'The Odin Project' for coming up with this project idea.

Credits to Icons8 for the assets used in this project (purchased Icons8 license).